Exercise #1.1

1. Define the following terms:
a. computer program: A structured combination of data and instructions used to operate a
computer; another term for software.
b. programming language: The set of instructions, data, and rules used to construct a program.
c. programming: The process of writing a computer program in a language that the computer
can respond to and other programmers can understand.
d. algorithm: A step-by-step sequence of instructions describing how to perform a computation.
e. pseudocode: A means of describing an algorithm with English-like phrases.
f. flowchart: A diagram that uses symbols to depict an algorithm.
g. procedure: A logically consistent set of instructions that produce a specific result.
h. object: A specific case, or instance, of a class. An object consists of data and methods.
i. method: An operation or a procedure that can be applied to the data in a class; a member
function.
j. message: The means of activating a particular method in an object.
k. response: The predictable result of sending a message.
l. class: A broad category that defines the characteristics of the data an object can contain and
the methods that can be applied to the data; also a programmer-defined data type.
m. source program: A file consisting of a program’s statements in C++ or another programming
language.
n. compiler: The program that translates source code into machine language all at once, before
any code is executed.
o. object program: The result of compiling a source program. It’s created by the compiler and
is assigned the extension .obj.
p. executable program: A program that’s ready to be run.
q. interpreter: The program that translates source code into machine language, one line at a
time, as the source code is executed.

2. (Practice) Determine a step-by-step procedure (list the steps) for each of the following tasks:
a. Fix a flat tire.
Stop vehicle in a safe, level location
Set the parking brake
Get jack, lug wrench, and spare tire
Check air pressure in spare tire
Use jack to raise vehicle so that damaged tire is clear of ground
Remove hubcap
Use lug wrench to loosen each lug nut
Use lug wrench to remove each lug nut
Place lug nuts into hubcap
Remove tire from axle
Place spare tire on axle
Restore each lug nut, and tighten by hand
Tighten all lug nuts securely with lug wrench
Replace hubcap
Release jack
Return jack, lug wrench, and damaged tire to trunk of vehicle

b. Make a phone call.
Lift phone receiver
Dial a number
Wait for answer
Speak to person, or respond to electronic instructions

c. Go to the store and purchase a loaf of bread.
Transport yourself to the store
Find bakery department
Select a loaf of bread
Proceed to checkout area
Exchange money for the loaf of bread

d. Roast a turkey.

3. (Practice) Determine and write an algorithm (list the steps) to interchange the contents of
two cups of liquid. Assume that a third cup is available to hold the contents of either cup temporarily.
Each cup should be rinsed before any new liquid is poured into it.

Label cups #1, #2, and #3, with #3 being the empty cup
Rinse #3
Pour contents of #1 into #3
Rinse #1
Pour contents of #2 into #1
Rinse #2
Pour contents of #3 into #2
Rinse #3

4. (Practice) Write a detailed set of instructions in English to calculate the dollar amount of
money in a piggybank that contains h half-dollars, q quarters, n nickels, d dimes, and p pennies.
5. (Practice) Write a set of detailed, step-by-step instructions in English to find the smallest
number in a group of three integer numbers.
6. (Practice) a. Write detailed, step-by-step instructions in English to calculate the fewest number
of dollar bills needed to pay a bill of amount TOTAL. For example, if TOTAL were $98,
the bills would consist of one $50 bill, two $20 bills, one $5 bill, and three $1 bills. For this
exercise, assume that only $100, $50, $20, $10, $5, and $1 bills are available.
b. Repeat Exercise 6a, but assume the bill is to be paid only in $1 bills.
7. (Practice) a. Write an algorithm to locate the first occurrence of the name JEAN in a list of
names arranged in random order.
b. Discuss how you could improve your algorithm for Exercise 7a if the list of names were
arranged in alphabetical order.
8. (Practice) Determine and write an algorithm to sort three numbers in ascending (from lowest
to highest) order. How would you solve this problem heuristically?
9. (Practice) Define an appropriate class for each of the following specific objects:
a. The number 5
b. A square measuring 4 inches by 4 inches
c. This C++ book
d. A 1955 Ford Thunderbird car
e. The last ballpoint pen you used
10. (Practice) a. What operations should the following objects be capable of doing?
i. A 1955 Ford Thunderbird car
ii. The last ballpoint pen you used
b. Do the operations determined for Exercise 10a apply only to the particular object listed, or
are they more general and applicable to all objects of the type listed?
